TABLE OF CONTENTS
Flutter App Architecture: The Domain Model

1

Flutter Layered Architecture

1

What is a Domain Model?

3

The Domain Layer

5

Business logic in the Model classes

7

Testing the Business Logic inside our Models

8

Conclusion

9

Flutter Foundations Course Now Available

10

Flutter Foundations Course
Want More?

10
11

Flutter In Production

11

Flutter & Firebase Masterclass

11

The Complete Dart Developer Guide

11

Flutter Animations Masterclass

11

CODE WITH ANDREA

Flutter App Architecture: The Domain
Model
#dart

#flutter

#app-architecture

Andrea Bizzotto
Feb 9, 2022

9 min read

Have you ever mixed up your UI, business logic and networking code into one messy bundle of
spaghetti code?
I know I did.

✋

After all, real-world app development is hard.
Books such as Domain-Driven Design (DDD) have been written to help us develop complex
software projects.
And at the heart of DDD lies the model, which captures important knowledge and concepts
that are needed to solve the problem at hand. And having a good domain model can make all
the difference between the success or failure of a software project.
Models are very important but they cannot live in isolation. Even the simplest of apps requires
some UI (what the user sees and interacts with) and needs to communicate with external APIs
to show some meaningful information.

Flutter Layered Architecture
In this context, it's often valuable to adopt a layered architecture, introducing a clear
separation of concerns between different parts of the system. And this makes our code easier
to read, maintain and test.
Broadly speaking, four different layers are normally identified:

presentation layer
application layer
domain layer
data layer

Flutter App Architecture using data, domain, application, and presentation layers.

The data layer sits at the bottom and contains the repositories that are used to talk to external
data sources.

Just above it, we find the domain and application layers. These layers are very important as
they hold all the models and business logic of our app. For more info, read the other articles in
this series:
Flutter App Architecture with Riverpod: An Introduction
Flutter Project Structure: Feature-first or Layer-first?
Flutter App Architecture: The Repository Pattern
Flutter App Architecture: The Presentation Layer
Flutter App Architecture: The Application Layer
In this article, we'll focus on the domain layer, using an eCommerce application as a practical
example. As part of this, we will learn:
what is a domain model
how to define entities and represent them as data classes in Dart
how to add business logic to our model classes
how to write unit tests for that business logic
Ready? Let's go!

What is a Domain Model?
Wikipedia defines the domain model like this:
The domain model is a conceptual model of the domain that incorporates both behavior
and data.
The data can be represented by a set of entities along with their relationships, while the
behavior is encoded by some business logic for manipulating those entities.
Using an eCommerce application as an example, we could identify the following entities:
User: ID and email
Product: ID, image URL, title, price, available quantity etc.
Item: Product ID and quantity
Cart: List of items, total

Order: List of items, price paid, status, paymente details etc.

eCommerce app: entities and their relationships

When practicing DDD, entities and relationships are not something we produce out of thin
air, but rather the end result of a (sometimes long) knowledge discovery process. As part of
the process, a domain vocabulary is also formalized and used by all parties.
Note how at this stage we are not concerned about where these entities come from or how
they are passed around in the system.
What's important is that our entities are at the heart of our system, because we need them to
solve domain-related problems for our users.
In DDD, a distinction is often made between entities and value objects. For more info, see
this thread about Value vs Entity objects on StackOverflow.
Of course, once we start building our app we need to implement those entities and decide
where they fit within our architecture.
And this is where the domain layer comes in.
Going forward, we will refer to entities as models that can be implemented as simple
classes in Dart.

The Domain Layer
Let's revisit our architecture diagram:

Flutter App Architecture using data, domain, application, and presentation layers.

As we can see, the models belong to the domain layer. They are retrieved by the repositories in
the data layer below, and can be modified by the services in the application layer above.
So how do these models look like in Dart?

Well, let's consider a Product model class for example:
/// The ProductID is an important concept in our domain
/// so it deserves a type of its own
typedef ProductID = String;

class Product {
Product({
required this.id,
required this.imageUrl,
required this.title,
required this.price,
required this.availableQuantity,
});
final ProductID id;
final String imageUrl;
final String title;
final double price;
final int availableQuantity;
// serialization code
factory Product.fromMap(Map<String, dynamic> map, ProductID id) {
...
}
Map<String, dynamic> toMap() {
...
}
}

At a very minimum, this class holds all the properties that we need to show in the UI:

Product card using all the properties from our model class.

And it also contains fromMap() and toMap() methods that are used for serialization.
There are various ways to define model classes and their serialization logic in Dart. For
more info, see my essential guide to JSON parsing in Dart and the follow up article about
code generation using Freezed.
Note how the Product model is a simple data classes that doesn't have access to
repositories, services, or other objects that belong outside the domain layer.

Business logic in the Model classes
Model classes can however include some business logic to express how they are meant to be
modified.
To illustrate this, let's consider a Cart model class instead:
class Cart {
const Cart([this.items = const {}]);
/// All the items in the shopping cart, where:
/// - key: product ID
/// - value: quantity
final Map<ProductID, int> items;
factory Cart.fromMap(Map<String, dynamic> map) { ... }
Map<String, dynamic> toMap() { ... }
}

This is implemented as a map of key-value pairs representing the product IDs and quantities of
the items that we have added to the shopping cart.
And since we can add and remove items from the cart, it may be useful to define an extension
that makes this task easier:
/// Helper extension used to update the items in the shopping cart.

extension MutableCart on Cart {
Cart addItem({required ProductID productId, required int quantity}) {
final copy = Map<ProductID, int>.from(items);
// * update item quantity. Read this for more details:
// * https://codewithandrea.com/tips/dart-map-update-method/

copy[productId] = quantity + (copy[productId] ?? 0);
return Cart(copy);
}
Cart removeItemById(ProductID productId) {
final copy = Map<ProductID, int>.from(items);
copy.remove(productId);
return Cart(copy);
}
}

The methods above make a copy of the items in the cart (using Map.from() ), modify the
values inside, and return a new immutable Cart object that can be used to update the
underlying data store (via the corresponding repository).
If you're not familiar with the syntax above, read: How to update a Map of key-value pairs
in Dart.
Many state management solutions rely on immutable objects in order to propagate state
changes and ensure that our widgets rebuild only when they should. The rule is that when
we need to mutate state in our models, we should do so by making a new, immutable copy.

Testing the Business Logic inside our Models
Note how the Cart class and its MutableCart extension don't have dependencies to any
objects that live outside the domain layer.
This makes them very easy to test.
To prove this point, here's a set of unit tests that we can write to verify the logic in the
addItem() method:

void main() {
group('add item', () {
test('empty cart - add item', () {
final cart = const Cart()
.addItem(productId: '1', quantity: 1);
expect(cart.items, {'1': 1});

});
test('empty cart - add two items', () {
final cart = const Cart()
.addItem(productId: '1', quantity: 1)
.addItem(productId: '2', quantity: 1);
expect(cart.items, {
'1': 1,
'2': 1,
});
});
test('empty cart - add same item twice', () {
final cart = const Cart()
.addItem(productId: '1', quantity: 1)
.addItem(productId: '1', quantity: 1);
expect(cart.items, {'1': 2});
});
});
}

Writing unit tests for our business logic is not only easy, but adds a lot of value.
If our business logic is incorrect, we are guaranteed to have bugs in our app. So we have every
incentive to make it easy to test, by ensuring our model classes don't have any dependencies.

Conclusion
We have discussed the importance of having a good mental model of our system.
We've also seen how to represent our models/entities as immutable data classes in Dart, along
with any business logic we may need to modify them.
And we've seen how to write some simple unit tests for that business logic, without resorting to
mocks or any complex test setup.

Here are some tips you may use as you design and build your apps:
explore the domain model and figure out what concepts and behaviors you need to
represent
express those concepts as entities along with their relationships

implement the corresponding Dart model classes
translate the behaviors into working code (business logic) that operates on those model
classes
add unit tests to verify the behaviors are implemented correctly
As you do that, think about what data you need to show in the UI and how the user will interact
with it.
But don't worry about how things connect together just yet. In fact, it's the job of the services
in the application layer to work with the models by mediating between the repositories in the
data layer and the controllers in the presentation layer.
And that will be the subject of a future article.

Flutter Foundations Course Now Available
I launched a brand new course that covers Flutter app architecture in great depth, along with
other important topics like state management, navigation & routing, testing, and much more:

Flutter Foundations Course
I N T E R M E D I AT E TO A DVA N C E D

Learn about State Management, App Architecture, Navigation,
Testing, and much more by building a Flutter eCommerce app on
iOS, Android, and web.

Want More?
Invest in yourself with my high-quality Flutter courses.

Flutter In Production
I N T E R M E D I AT E TO A DVA N C E D

Flutter & Firebase
Masterclass

Learn about flavors, environments, error
monitoring, analytics, release management,
CI/CD, and finally ship your Flutter apps to
the stores.

I N T E R M E D I AT E TO A DVA N C E D

The Complete Dart
Developer Guide

Flutter Animations
Masterclass

BEGINNER

I N T E R M E D I AT E

Learn Dart Programming in depth. Includes:
basic to advanced topics, exercises, and
projects. Last updated to Dart 2.15.

Master Flutter animations and build a
completely custom habit tracking
application.

🚀

Learn about Firebase Auth, Cloud Firestore,
Cloud Functions, Stripe payments, and much
more by building a full-stack eCommerce app
with Flutter & Firebase.

CODE WITH ANDREA
Copyright © 2020-present Coding With Flutter Limited

Contact

Twitter

Discord

GitHub

RSS

Meta

Privacy Policy

Terms of Use

