TABLE OF CONTENTS
How to Release Your Flutter App on the iOS App Store

1

What You’ll Learn:

1

Should You Sell Apps on the App Store?

2

1. Enroll in the Apple Developer Program

2

Enrollment Steps

3

What Happens Next?

4

2. Register Your App ID

4

How to Register Your App ID
3. Create your app in App Store Connect
How to Create a New App in App Store Connect
4. Prepare your App For Review

5
5
6
8

Sections to Complete

9

Before Submitting for Review

10

5. Create a Privacy Manifest in Xcode

11

What is a Privacy Manifest?

12

How to Create a Privacy Manifest in Xcode

12

What to Add to the Privacy Manifest

12

Example File

13

6. Update the Xcode project settings

13

Key Xcode project settings

14

Code Signing

14

App Version and Build Number

15

7. Build, upload, and submit your app to App Store Connect

16

Building the iOS App Bundle

16

Uploading the App Bundle to App Store Connect

17

Submitting Your App for Review

18

What Happens Next?

19

Wrapping Up

19

What’s Next?

19

Submitting App Updates to App Store Connect

20

Scaling with CI/CD Pipelines

20

New Course: Flutter in Production

20

Flutter In Production

21

Want More?

21

Flutter Foundations Course

21

Flutter & Firebase Masterclass

21

The Complete Dart Developer Guide

22

Flutter Animations Masterclass

22

CODE WITH ANDREA

How to Release Your Flutter App on the
iOS App Store
#dart

#flutter

#production

Andrea Bizzotto
Dec 3, 2024

13 min read

Your Flutter app is ready, and you’ve completed all the important pre-release steps. Now it’s
time for the final step: publishing it on the App Store and sharing it with the world. But where
do you start?
Sure, the Flutter documentation provides a technical guide for building and releasing an iOS
app. But publishing your first app involves more than just building and uploading—it’s a process
filled with red tape, guidelines, and steps that aren’t always obvious.
If you’re new to this, don’t worry. This article will provide a high-level roadmap for releasing
your Flutter app on the App Store. Even if you’re familiar with this process, you may discover a
trick or two along the way.

👍

What You’ll Learn:
1. How to enroll in the Apple Developer Program.
2. How to register your App ID in the Apple Developer Portal.
3. How to create your app in App Store Connect.
4. How to prepare your app for review, including metadata, privacy, and compliance.
5. How to create a Privacy Manifest in Xcode.
6. How to update the Xcode project settings, including code signing.
7. How to build, upload, and submit your app for App Store review.

Want a more detailed, hands-on guide? My Flutter in Production course includes a
complete module with 20 lessons that cover each step in depth—from account setup to
submission and beyond.
Let’s dive in!

🚀

Should You Sell Apps on the App Store?
For many developers, the App Store is the ultimate platform for reaching a high-quality
audience. Apple users are far more willing to pay for apps compared to Android users (it’s not
even close). And with payments seamlessly linked to their Apple ID, purchasing is frictionless.
However, joining Apple’s walled garden comes with trade-offs:
15% revenue cut: Even with the small business program, Apple takes a significant cut of your
earnings.
No direct customer ownership: Apple controls the relationship with your customers, making
it harder to connect with them or market additional products.
App review delays: The app review process can take hours or days—and even longer if your
app is rejected, causing delays in your release timeline.
The App Store offers real opportunities, but remember that Apple stands between you and
your users. If your app fits Apple’s ecosystem and you’re prepared to work within its
constraints, the App Store can be a powerful platform to reach millions of users worldwide.

1. Enroll in the Apple Developer Program
To publish apps on the App Store, you’ll need to join the Apple Developer Program:

Apple Developer Program: enrollment page

Cost: $99 per year.
Who can enroll: Individuals or organizations.
How to enroll: Start the process at developer.apple.com/programs/enroll/.
Reduce fees: Join the Small Business Program to pay a 15% commission instead of 30%
(eligibility applies).

Enrollment Steps
The enrollment process is fairly simple and involves the following steps:
Start your Enrollment
Sign in with your Apple ID (or create an account)
Agree to the Apple Developer Agreement
Confirm your personal information
Select your entity type (individual, organization, or others)
Obtain a D-U-N-S Number using this service (organizations only - can take up to 30 business
days, or up to 8 business days for the expedited service)
Agree to the legal terms
Purchase your membership
Complete the verification process

What Happens Next?
Once you’ve submitted all the required information:
Verification: Apple may take a few days to verify your enrollment.
Activation: Once verified, you’ll receive an activation email.
Access to Resources: With your membership, you’ll have access to your Apple Developer
Account, documentation, and additional resources.

2. Register Your App ID
After enrolling in the Apple Developer Program, you'll get access to your Apple Developer
Account:

Apple Developer Account page

The next step is to register your App ID, which uniquely identifies your app within Apple’s
ecosystem.

How to Register Your App ID
1. Open the identifiers page of your Apple Developer account.
2. Click + to register a new App ID.
3. Enter an app name, select Explicit App ID, and enter the Bundle ID (e.g.,
com.yourcompany.yourapp ).

4. Select the capabilities your app requires (e.g., Push Notifications, In-App Purchases), then
click Continue.
5. Click Register to confirm your App ID.
Note that the Bundle ID must match the Bundle Identifier property in Xcode under Runner >
General > Identity:

Where to find the Bundle Identifier in Xcode

3. Create your app in App Store Connect

After registering your App ID, the next step is to create your app in App Store Connect.

How to Create a New App in App Store Connect
Go to App Store Connect > Apps, then add a new app:

To create a new app, click the "+" button

Fill in the required details:

Adding the new app details

These include:
Platforms: Ensure iOS is selected.
Name: The app name displayed to users on the App Store.
Primary Language: The default language for your app’s metadata.
Bundle ID: Select the App ID you registered in the previous step.
SKU: A unique internal ID for your app (not visible to users).
User Access: Decide which App Store Connect users can manage the app.
When you're done, click Create to finalize the setup.

4. Prepare your App For Review
After clicking Create, you’ll land on the app’s overview page:

Main page for a new app in App Store Connect

Note that entering all the information is long process and you'll need to fill multiple pages:

Fill all the data in "App Information", "App Privacy", "Pricing and Availability", before adding your app for review

Here’s what you’ll need to provide and where to find it.

Sections to Complete
Main Page
Preview and Screenshots: up to 3 app previews (optional), and up to 10 screenshots
App Metadata: description, keywords, support URL, marketing URL, version, copyright
App Review Information: Provide:
Sign-in Information: If your app requires login credentials for testing, create a test
account and share them here.
Contact Information: Provide details for Apple to contact you during the review
process.

Notes: Add any additional context for the App Review team.
App Information
Localizable Information: your app's name and subtitle
General Information: bundle ID, primary and secondary category, content rights
information
Age Rating: a questionnaire with multiple selections and yes/no questions
App Encryption Documentation: specify whether your app uses non-exempt encryption
(see tip below for most cases).
Pricing and Availability
Price Schedule: starting price for your app (free or paid)
App Availability: countries where your app will be available to purchase or download
App Privacy
Privacy Policy: a link to your app’s Privacy Policy (required).
Data Collection: Specify your app’s data collection and usage practices. This is a multistep process where you’ll need to disclose:
Types of data collected (e.g., location, identifiers).
How the data is used (e.g., analytics, advertising).
Whether the data is linked to user identity or used for tracking.
Tip: If your app doesn’t use non-exempt encryption (this applies to most apps), add a
ITSAppUsesNonExemptEncryption key and set the value to NO in your Info.plist

file in Xcode. This will prevent extra encryption documentation steps when uploading your
builds to App Store Connect. Read this tip for more details.

Before Submitting for Review
Make sure you’ve entered all the required app details. If any information is missing, you’ll see an
error when you click Add for Review:

Warning about required items before the app can be added for review

5. Create a Privacy Manifest in Xcode
When you specify your data collection practices in App Store Connect, Apple generates
privacy labels for your app, which are displayed on your App Store listing. For example:

App Store privacy labels

Starting November 12, 2024, Apple also requires you to add a Privacy Manifest to your app
before submitting it to App Store Connect.

What is a Privacy Manifest?

A Privacy Manifest is a file named PrivacyInfo.xcprivacy that documents your app's data
collection practices and API usage. This file helps Apple understand what data your app
collects, how it’s used, and why.

How to Create a Privacy Manifest in Xcode
Follow these steps to create a Privacy Manifest for your app:
Open the ios/Runner.xcworkspace project in Xcode.
Right-click the Runner folder and select New File from Template...
Scroll down to the Resource section, choose App Privacy, and click Next.
Create the file with the default name PrivacyInfo .

What to Add to the Privacy Manifest
Once the file is created, add the following values to the App Privacy Configuration section:
NSPrivacyTracking: Indicates whether your app uses tracking, as defined by Apple’s App
Tracking Transparency framework.
NSPrivacyTrackingDomains: Lists internet domains your app uses for tracking purposes.
NSPrivacyCollectedDataTypes: Details the types of data collected by your app (e.g.,
location, identifiers).
NSPrivacyAccessedAPITypes: Describes the APIs your app accesses and the reasons for
their use (e.g., User Defaults for local storage).
These should match the data collection types you declared in App Store Connect.
Once all the information is complete, your PrivacyInfo file should look similar to this:

Xcode privacy manifest file

Example File
Here's an example of the completed PrivacyInfo.xcprivacy for one of my apps:
Example PrivacyInfo.xcprivacy
To learn more, read the official Apple docs about User privacy and data use and Privacy
manifest files.

6. Update the Xcode project settings
Before building and submitting your app to App Store Connect, review your Xcode project
settings to ensure everything is configured correctly. You can find these settings in Runner >
General:

Xcode project settings (General tab)

Key Xcode project settings
Here are the key settings you need to review and update:
Supported Destinations: In addition to iPhone, decide if your app should support iPad, Mac,
and Apple Vision
Minimum Deployment Version: Targeting an iOS version that is 2 years old ensures your
app will be compatible with over 90% of devices (source).
Identity: Double-check the App Category, as it impacts your app’s discoverability on the App
Store. Other fields like Display Name, Bundle Identifier, Version, and Build Number are
derived from your pubspec.yaml , file, so there should be no need to change them.
Deployment Info: Review and update the supported orientations based on your app’s
design.
App Icons and Launch Screen: Verify that they look as intended.
Tip: use packages like flutter_launcher_icons and flutter_native_splash to generate
consistent app icons and launch screens for all platforms.

Code Signing
In addition to the general settings, you’ll need to review the Signing & Capabilities tab:

Signing & Capabilities tab in Xcode

Enable Automatic Signing: Ensure Automatically manage signing is enabled.
Select Your Team: In the dropdown, choose your Team. This allows Xcode to automatically
generate the necessary certificate and provisioning profile (if they don’t already exist).
By default, a development certificate is created (rather than a distribution one). This is
normal and won’t prevent you from uploading your app to App Store Connect. You can find
all your certificates in the Apple Developer Portal.

App Version and Build Number
In Flutter, the version and build number are defined in the pubspec.yaml file under the
version key:

version: 0.3.4+18

In App Store Connect, you’ll need to manually set the app version number to match the version
in your pubspec.yaml . Here’s how:
1. Go to App Store Connect > My Apps > Your App.

2. Scroll down to the metadata and set the correct version number to match what’s in your
pubspec.yaml :

Setting the version number in App Store Connect

7. Build, upload, and submit your app to App Store
Connect
Once you’ve verified your Xcode settings and versioning, it’s time to build your app bundle and
upload it to App Store Connect for review.

Building the iOS App Bundle
To build the iOS app bundle, run the following command:
flutter build ipa

Depending on your app’s configuration, you might need to pass additional flags. To see all
supported arguments, run: flutter build ipa --help .
If your app supports multiple flavors, specify the flavor using the --flavor flag. For example:
# To build the prod flavor
flutter build ipa --flavor prod -t lib/main_prod.dart --dart-define-fromfile=.env.prod

This command will generate an IPA file (iOS App Archive) in the build/ios/ipa/ directory.
The IPA is the format used to distribute iOS apps.

Uploading the App Bundle to App Store Connect
There are multiple ways to upload your app bundle, but for first-time uploads, I recommend
using the Apple Transporter app. Transporter simplifies the upload process by handling both
the upload and validation for you.
How to Use Transporter:
Open the Apple Transporter app and sign in with your Apple ID.
Drag and drop the build/ios/ipa/*.ipa file into the app.
Click Deliver to upload your app bundle:

After a few minutes, Transporter will show the app as Ready for Internal Testing:

Submitting Your App for Review
Go to your app in App Store Connect, scroll down to Build, click the + icon, select your build,
and click Done:

Then, click Add for Review at the top of the page, then Submit to App Review:

What Happens Next?
Your app will now enter Apple’s review queue. Apple’s review team will assess your app for
compliance with their guidelines. If everything checks out, you’ll receive a notification, and your
app will be ready for release!

Wrapping Up
Congratulations! You’ve successfully submitted your iOS app to App Store Connect—the final
step before Apple reviews it for release on the App Store.

🎉

What’s Next?
While waiting for App Review, it’s a good idea to get familiar with Apple’s review guidelines and
resources to ensure a smooth approval process. Start with the App Review page, which
includes helpful documentation like:
App Review Guidelines
Human Interface Guidelines
Guidelines for Using Apple Trademarks and Copyrights
Submitting for review
Avoiding common issues

Submitting App Updates to App Store Connect
Once your app is approved, you’ll likely submit updates to add new features and fix bugs. While
using the Transporter app works for occasional uploads, it can quickly become tedious if you
update your app frequently.
A better solution? Automate the process with a build script that uses the xcrun command to
automatically build and upload your app to App Store Connect.
To learn more about this, read:
iOS App Store: Build and Upload Script

Scaling with CI/CD Pipelines
If you work as part of a team or release updates often, consider setting up CI/CD pipelines to
automate your app builds, testing, and releases. CI/CD enables you to:
Save time by automating repetitive tasks.
Run specific workflows (e.g. run tests) when certain events are triggered (e.g. when pushing a
branch).
Distribute apps more efficiently via TestFlight or the App Store.
To dive deeper into these topics, and many more, you can explore my new course.

👇

New Course: Flutter in Production
When it comes to shipping and maintaining apps in production, there are many important
aspects to consider:
Preparing for release: splash screens, flavors, environments, error reporting, analytics, force
update, privacy, T&Cs.
App Submissions: app store metadata & screenshots, compliance, testing vs distribution
tracks, dealing with rejections.
Release automation: CI workflows, environment variables, custom build steps, code signing,
uploading to the stores.
Post-release: error monitoring, bug fixes, addressing user feedback, over-the-air updates,
feature flags & A/B testing.

My latest course will help you get your app to the stores faster and with fewer headaches.
If you’re interested, you can learn more and enroll here.

👇

Flutter In Production
I N T E R M E D I AT E TO A DVA N C E D

Learn about flavors, environments, error monitoring, analytics,
release management, CI/CD, and finally ship your Flutter apps to the
stores.

🚀

Want More?
Invest in yourself with my high-quality Flutter courses.

Flutter Foundations Course
I N T E R M E D I AT E TO A DVA N C E D

Learn about State Management, App
Architecture, Navigation, Testing, and much

Flutter & Firebase
Masterclass
I N T E R M E D I AT E TO A DVA N C E D

more by building a Flutter eCommerce app

Learn about Firebase Auth, Cloud Firestore,

on iOS, Android, and web.

Cloud Functions, Stripe payments, and much
more by building a full-stack eCommerce app

The Complete Dart
Developer Guide

Flutter Animations
Masterclass

BEGINNER

I N T E R M E D I AT E

Learn Dart Programming in depth. Includes:
basic to advanced topics, exercises, and

Master Flutter animations and build a
completely custom habit tracking

projects. Last updated to Dart 2.15.

application.

CODE WITH ANDREA
Copyright © 2020-present Coding With Flutter Limited

Contact

Twitter

Discord

GitHub

RSS

Meta

Privacy Policy

Terms of Use

